.. keywords
   North Slope, Alaska, Stefansson, Harrison, Gwydyr, sound, bay, Mackenzie, Beaufort, location

About North Slope, Alaska
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This North Slope, Alaska location file is the third in a series for this area, covering the region of significant oil development that occurs on the North Slope. The *North Slope* Location File combines the two previous Arctic Location Files – *Stefansson Sound* and *Harrison and Gwydyr Bays* – and extends east into Canada to include the Mackenzie River delta as well.

The Arctic Ocean in this region, the Beaufort Sea, is covered with ice for about nine months each year. By mid-July, the Beaufort is usually ice-free from the shore to the edge of the pack ice, which by late summer, retreats from 6 to 60 miles (10 km to 100 km) offshore (Committee 2003). **This Location File should only be used during these ice-free times.**

The coastline modeled in this Location File is part of Alaska's (and Canada's) beautiful and fragile tundra. Tundra is a flat, treeless plain that supports shrubby or mat-like vegetation, such as low shrubs, sedges, grasses, mosses, and lichens. In Alaska, the North Slope tundra extends north from the foothills of the Brooks Range to the Arctic Ocean, and west from the Canadian border to the Chukchi Sea.

The North Slope shoreline is irregular, containing many small bays, lagoons, spits, beaches, and barrier islands. Extensive mud flats often occur in the deltas of the rivers. Some of the larger rivers discharging into the Beaufort Sea form depositional deltas that extend several miles from the shore. Most of the coastline is low-lying, with only small bluffs less than 10 feet (3 meters) high. Some areas of the coast are directly exposed to the open ocean, and other sections are protected by chains of barrier islands that are composed of sand and gravel (Committee 2003).

Gwydyr Bay is a lagoon area west of Prudhoe Bay, between the Return Islands and the mainland in northeastern Alaska. Harrison Bay is a large inlet north and west of the Colville River Delta. Rivers in this area tend to be fast-flowing and braided, with extensive delta systems. The river systems support a diversity of plant and animal life, and can serve as corridors for migrating mammals and birds (Committee 2003). 

North Slope Location File
============================================

The North Slope Location File simulates open water conditions (generally occurring mid-July through mid-September) in the coastal area between Harrison Bay and the Mackenzie River delta in Canada, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) as well as Gwydyr Bay and Stefansson Sound. The Location File contains circulation patterns that simulate the wind-driven coastal circulation and the flows of some of the region's larger rivers. Because the tidal currents are generally less than 5 cm s-1 (Endicott 1992), tides have not been included in the simulation. The Location File includes detailed circulation between the numerous barrier islands of this region; however, other than the field work done for the earlier *Harrison and Gwydyr Bays* Location File, we lack data for calibration of the currents.

In this Location File, seven North Slope rivers are simulated. Unfortunately, east of Prudhoe Bay few bathymetric surveys of the river channels have been conducted and very little information exists on flow rates at the mouths of the rivers. With so little data available to build the hydrodynamics of the four Stefansson Sound river channels, we could not set the range of values and user-inputs well for any of the rivers. (The Sag River has the most data; however, these data are not as good as we would like, because the gauge is very far upstream.) Other complications in simulating these rivers are that the river flow rates can change very quickly, and the physical terrain of these braided rivers includes extensive mud flats, spits, and barrier islands. Consequently, we used our best professional judgment to depict these rivers. 

A result of the limitations in simulating the rivers is that more information is needed from the user in order to set the river flows within a reasonable margin of error. In this Location File, the user needs to set a flow velocity near (generally < 1 NM) the mouth of each river. The user can either (1) make an estimate by throwing an orange into the river channel and tracking it with a global positioning system (GPS), pacing off the distance traveled, or by using some other estimation method; or (2) guess a range of values and see what happens in the model.  

In general, the higher the river flow, the harder it is for oil to move up into the river. Wind can partly overcome the river flow to move oil, but the complicated geometry of these river mouths (e.g., braided rivers with deltas and many barrier islands) means the wind would have to change direction in just the right combination of speeds and directions in order to move the oil through these complicated channels.