.. keywords
   ics209, export, report

ICS209
^^^^^^

This tab is designed to help the user fill out the ICS209 form. While the graph initially shows the entire spill run, you can change the start and end time to show only a portion of the run.

To change the report period, either click and drag on the graph to create a rectangle that represents the area of interest, or enter the Start Time or select the date and time using the calendar icon next to the entry box. To enter a date and time manually, use date format yyyy/mm/dd and time format 00:00 (24-hour clock). To select a date using the calendar, click on the calendar icon next to the start time entry. Click on the left or right arrows to change the month, and click on a date square to select it. Select a time from the list to the right of the calendar, scrolling up or down as necessary.

A table will appear below the graph based on the start and end times that you selected by either highlighting a rectangle on the graph or entering start and end times. 

Use the drop-down menu to the right to change the units shown in the graph and table. 

Export Options
=================================

To export into a spreadsheet, click on the CSV (comma-separated values) option. This file can then be imported into your spreadsheet.

To copy the information into a document such as Microsoft word, click on the html option. Highlight the text or data that you want to copy and then paste it into your document.

To print the page, click on print.
