Tides
======================

Tides account for 83%-86% of the current variability in the Strait of Juan de Fuca (Holbrook et al., 1980b). Tidal currents are superimposed on a mean estuarine circulation with fresher, warmer water exiting the Strait overlying cooler, more saline water flowing into the Strait. Tidal currents become more complicated in the eastern part of the Strait, where there can be significant asymmetries between flood and ebb tides (Ebbesmeyer et al., 1991; Frisch and Holbrook, 1980). There are numerous eddies in the eastern Strait of Juan de Fuca.

**Winds, storms and surface current reversals at the entrance to the Strait**

**Local winds** appear to play an insignificant role in surface currents in the Strait of Juan de Fuca. On the other hand, **coastal winds** are highly correlated with pulses of relatively warm, fresh water that enter the Strait during offshore storms and southwesterly winds (Hickey et al., 1991; Holbrook et al., 1980a; Holbrook et al., 1980b). These pulses occur most often in winter, typically at a rate of 2-3 times a month and lasting 2-7 days (Holbrook and Halpern, 1982; Holbrook et al., 1980a; Holbrook et al., 1980b). These pulses can be sufficiently strong to overcome the mean estuarine currents and cause surface currents in the Strait to reverse direction as far inland as Dungeness Spit (Ebbesmeyer et al., 1990; Frisch et al., 1981; Holbrook et al., 1980b). Occasionally, a storm will occur in the summer and reverse currents as well (Frisch et al., 1981; Hickey et al., 1991; Holbrook et al., 1980b).

Typical surface currents in the western Strait are 20-40 cm/s, with little variability in the summer and high variability in the winter. Sometimes, wintertime surface currents in the western Strait are 30 cm/s *inbound*. The region where mean, outgoing estuarine currents meet incoming, storm- induced currents can have convergence zones and strong currents that flow across the Strait (e.g. Hodgins, 1994). This has important implications for any surface pollutants, which can be pushed on shore from this convergence of opposing surface currents.