Upwelling State
======================================

The upwelling state is named for the upwelling of cold (approximately 11°C) subsurface waters near Pt. Conception that often accompanies this state. The upwelling state occurs primarily in spring, although it has also been observed in other seasons. In terms of the conceptual models of the momentum balance, the upwelling state occurs when strong (>10 m/s), persistent (several days or more), upwelling favorable (equator ward) winds overwhelm any poleward, along-shelf pressure gradient.

Currents: The most characteristic feature of the resulting flow field is southward flow at the western entrance to the SBC, which continues eastward from San Miguel to Santa Cruz and out the eastern SBC entrance. However, even during upwelling, the flow can be weakly (10 cm/s) westward on the mainland coast of the SBC. While there can be a cyclonic (counterclockwise) recirculation in the western channel during upwelling, the southern limb of the circulation is almost always stronger than the northern limb. Weaker velocities tend to occur in the eastern SBC over the road shelf between Port Hueneme and Santa Barbara and in the SMB within 5 km of the coast. Within the SMB, the strongest (20 cm/s) velocities are observed over the 100 m isobath between Purisima Pt. and Pt. Arguello, where strong southward velocities are observed. Very weak velocities (<10 cm/s) are often observed within 5 km of the shore in San Luis Obispo Bay and between Pt. Sal and Purisima Pt. During upwelling, velocity fluctuations (relative to the mean upwelling state) are strongest southwest of Pt. Conception. This may be an expression of the tendency for an upwelling jet to fluctuate in direction and speed during upwelling. The weakest fluctuations are found over the northeast SBC shelf between Santa Barbara and Ventura, as well as the above-mentioned nearshore regions (within 5 km) of the SMB coast.

Winds: During upwelling, the wind field tends to show strong velocities (10 m/s) from the northwest (to the southeast) south of Pt. Conception at NDBC 46054. Within SMB, winds are generally onshore and equator ward. Within the eastern SBC, winds can be relatively weak.

Sea-Surface Temperatures: When available, satellite sea-surface temperature images often show cold water (11-12°C) between Pt. Arguello and Pt. Conception. Cooler water can be seen spreading southward from Pt. Conception past San Miguel Island and eastward from San Miguel towards the eastern entrance to the SBC.