Convergent State
======================================

The convergent state is named for the convergence of southward flow west of Pt. Arguello with westward flow south of Pt. Conception. The convergent state occurs primarily in summer, although it has also been observed in other seasons. In terms of the conceptual models of the momentum balance, the convergent state tends to occur when upwelling favorable winds and a strong poleward, along-shelf pressure gradient exist.

Currents: The most characteristic feature of the resulting flow field is a strong cyclonic recirculation in the western SBC with about equal strength in the northern and southern limbs of the recirculation. During the convergent state, velocities in the western SBC are often 40 cm/s or more, up to 70 cm/s. While northwestward flow at the eastern entrance to the SBC often occurs during the convergent state, northeastward flow directly across the eastern entrance to the SBC can also occur. The convergent synoptic state averages are accompanied by southward flow in the SMB near the shore and off-shelf flow further away from the coast. The combination of westward flow at the northeast SBC entrance and southward flow along the SMB coast is associated with convergence and offshore flow southwest of Pt. Conception. Relative to the upwelling state, stronger velocities are observed in the western SBC and in most of the SMB. The highest velocity fluctuations are observed at the western entrance to the SBC. The lowest velocity fluctuations are again found between Santa Barbara and Ventura and in San Luis Obispo Bay.

Winds: In the convergent state, the wind field can resemble the upwelling wind field, although this is not diagnostic; weak winds sometimes accompany the convergence state, but not always. The average winds at NDBC 46054 during convergence are nearly equal to those observed in upwelling, above 7 m/s from the northwest (to the southeast).

Sea-Surface Temperatures: In the convergent state, satellite sea-surface temperature images often show warm water (17-20°C) extending from the eastern SBC north and westward along the mainland coast. South of Pt. Conception, this warm water turns south and, in exceptionally clear images, a counterclockwise recirculation of warm water can often be discerned. Cold, upwelled waters are still present between Pt. Conception and Pt. Arguello, often with tongues of cold water reaching westward or southwestward.
