.. keywords
   San Juan, Puerto Rico, location

About San Juan, Puerto Rico
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

San Juan, Puerto Rico is one of the best natural harbors in the Caribbean, and is the second oldest city in the Americas. Caribbean shipping is centered around the harbor because it is the second largest sea port in the area (New York City is the largest) (Blue Water Maritime, http://www.bluewatermaritime.com/shippingports.htm). San Juan is the only harbor on the north coast that affords protection in all weather. It is protected on the north by the relatively high land of Isla San Juan, and on the south, east, and west by the adjacent low mangrove swamps of the Puerto Rico mainland.


Background
==================================

The currents along the northern shore of Puerto Rico are part of the westward drift caused by the easterly trade winds. Within this Location File, large-scale, wind-driven currents are simulated offshore, and tidally forced currents are simulated for San Juan harbor. Extensive reef systems are found within San Juan harbor and along the outer coastline, where the surface currents are highly variable, both spatially and temporally. Due to the intricate structure of the reef systems, the fine scale circulation within them was not simulated in this Location File.

Easterly trade winds with a daily land/sea breeze superimposed are the common wind circulation pattern in the San Juan area. Locally, winds are controlled by land/sea breeze; winds blow onshore during daylight hours, changing to blow offshore after sunset. Neither the land/sea breeze phenomena, nor its effects on nearshore circulation, were simulated in the San Juan Location File.

Hurricanes and tropical storms generally bring strong northerly to northeasterly winds, creating heavy sea and breakers at the entrance to San Juan harbor.
Longshore currents generated by high winds are not simulated in this Location File.